
- canadian election
- global politics
- indian politics
- observation is not passive
- media/food consumed alters the observer/eater
- consumption is self-reinforcing
> consumption is fractal
> fractal speed used to be slow
> fractal / show / machine
> the grid is everywhere
> stepping back from the machine
> observation is not a passive act
> parting of the sea
- do we crave conflict? a righteous enemy?
- exacerbating artificial divides
- Baader–Meinhof for personalities
- cognitive biases become truth
> people at the centre of the machine

---

Compassion for Donald

---

The 2019  Canadian federal election is over. I doubt anyone feels very good about
it. Not because a minority government threatens to immobilize the Canadian
government. I mean, there is that. But the suffocating air of this election was far
less tangible, far less quantifiable, than counted ballots. The outmoded left-right
political spectrum is gasping for breath through a death rattle and, for those of us
who plan to be here on the far side, it's disgusting to watch. From the campaign
trail to the leaders' debates through to the election night speeches, our country's
assessment of this election has been summed up with a box of adjectives on a
shelf. "Nasty" and "divisive" are not the adjectives we want in our box - but we need
to turn off the TV and our phones for a second to figure out exactly how we put them
there.

I arrived back in India one week ago. The political climate here hasn't changed a
great deal in the five months I was home in Canada. It would be fair to describe
politics in India as "nasty" and "divisive." In fact, it's safe to say India's
adjective box is much like Canada's these days. That's surprising, given that India's
current government is led by a war criminal (or state terrorist, if you prefer). But
Canada's? Our federal avatar is a bumbling pretty-boy doofus. In a world where the
chief is paraded around as though he or she were not a representative, but the
government itself, these two fellows hardly seem comparable. Why are our two wildly
disparate political environments painted in the same tones? It is perhaps because it
seems there is a global movement to paint all politics in these colours. The Movement
is not the toxic brew of modern, ever-present polar media and Facebook-slave-fueled
data science, in the form of "free" news and entertainment and whatever sequel we are
to expect from Cambridge Analytica. The Movement is us.

---

We tend to think of observation as a passive act, immaterial and innocuous. Whether
or not the books we read and movies we watch influence our decision-making process is
somehow still a point of contention among people who grew up, or through, the
overreactive days of early video games. But science, and even the most superficial
self-observation, speaks quite clearly to the nature of adult neuroplasticity - you
don't need double-blind studies across multiple research labs to tell you that
binge-watching Breaking Bad will leave you dreaming about Walter White and reflecting
on his behaviour during your waking hours. Physically, emotionally, and
intellectually we cannot help but digest this sensory fertilizer. Our constitution is
not reflective of what we've consumed. Watching Joaquin Phoenix perform his danse
macabre for 122 minutes of your life will not ensconce you in his suit just as eating
a Happy Meal won't throw you into a BMI category for the Morbidly Obese. Change takes
time. Only through repeated exposure and constant reinforcement will the nutrients or
poisons targeting the mind really take hold. Their effects are also obviously not
guaranteed. But, handy for their producers, they are both self-reinforcing and
fractal. A well-designed TV series won't just entertain us but it will drag us
through all five seasons, achingly curious to find out what happens next. Sometimes
this concoction of curiosity and craving will literally leave us feeling
poisoned. Perhaps I shouldn't have watched six episodes in a row. I have an early
morning meeting tomorrow. But there is an inflection point where the fresh memory of
sodium and fast carbohydrates competes with the unpleasant sensations associated with
their very integration into our body and we find ourselves craving another dose.

Self-reinforcement is as old as society's original bad habits, scaled for the
individual. Alcohol is poison. Aldous Huxley cleanly captured the paradox of our
addiction to poison in Heaven and Hell but pointing a finger at the demon has done
little to cage it since 1956. This individual scale is exacerbated by
environment. It's more fun to poison yourself in a room with other people- people who
will confirm this behaviour makes sense by sharing it with you. Our consumption of
media and Happy Meals has seen external reinforcement on much slower scales until
very recently. The fractals were thick and the algorithm was slow. McDonalds
marketing could hardly change from moment to moment when we were children and there
was little reason to change the format of news or entertainment overnight. Certainly
not every night.

Biologically, human beings probably have not changed a great deal since Huxley penned
mild praise for psychedelics in 1956 but the fractals are thin now and the shapes are
harder to follow. Every cycle of the algorithm speeds the algorithm and to stand back
from the entire show makes it painfully clear that no one is in control
anymore. Artificial intelligence, at scale, has the same vulgar beauty that the
democratization of the internet had a decade ago. It's not easy to stand back from
the show anymore since the show touches absolutely everything. The kaapi uncle near
my old house in Bangalore votes BJP according to news he receives at the back of his
darshini filtered through the gossip of middle-class customers who spend their coffee
break mixing his brew with the next and previous recipient of the gossip baton:
YouTube. Four months in an off-grid cabin in Nova Scotia ensured my opinions about
China and the USA were filtered through the neighbours I saw once a week. There is no
real escape. An off-grid cabin is about as close as I can get to crawling into a cave
for the quarter to see what the world looks like on the other side - but it's close
enough. It looks more or less the same.

If we can stand back for a minute, extract ourselves from our little niche in the
machine, we can see the fractals more clearly. They are thin and slippery, folding
upon themselves with great rapidity. But they are also all alike. The patterns of
news and Netflix are the first to pop out of our global communication network. Like a
magic eye poster with multiple layers, there are other patterns to see and the final
pattern is that of the Self. But before trying to disassemble the very foundation of
human identity, we can look at the patterns of others and extrapolate that our own
patterns are perhaps not so different. The others who sit in the centre of the
machine look largely as they did from our own seat inside the machine: grabbing data,
processing it, and passing it on. Some do not bother to process and it's hard to say
if the processing itself contains meaning for the many. But it is those on the edges
of the machine who deserve our focused attention, those who appear not to regurgitate
their input. If we defocus, see them as an individual and a whole all at once, we
know the consequences of  observation in isolation. The observer is changed, of
course. But the object of observation is also changed. Observation is not a passive
act.



---

It is in this way that the human collective has parted the sea. To one side, The
Left. To the other side, The Right. Both giant waves threatening to crash into the
other, should the collaborative synthesis of our aggregate fantasy break down even
for a moment. We imagine the waves into existence. In reality, there is only water.

It is easy to see how this happens. The intellect and emotion behind the waves are
very real to us, fueled by very real events. We associate behaviours and qualities
with each wave. Weakness, discrimination, carelessness,  corruption, stupidity,
hatefulness. A teenager shot by police in the eastern United States, a girl
gang-raped in a temple in Northern India, a riot breaking out in Paris. The events
become behaviours and we begin to believe these behaviours are inherent not to a
person but to an entire wave of people. As we create an image of the
individuals - archetypes - who comprise our imaginary waves, the sort of person who
could possibly align themselves with such broken ideals and broken behaviours, we
start to see this sort of person more and more frequently, like a Baader–Meinhof
Phenomenon for personalities.

The longer these imaginary waves reside in our minds and the more we associate
ourselves with the right wave, the more we truly become that thing. We easily feel
attacked. An affront to our wave is an affront to us and we find ourselves quick to
retaliate. Suddenly, the world is in our phones, the news is minute-by-minute, our
cognitive biases are becoming our own hard truth, and all our newfound anger is not
simply justified, but righteous.

In the centre of the machine there are people who thrive on our new, high speed
fractal model. They turn over their input with substantial
amplifications. Consciously or unconsciously, they see the patterns in the machine
and think to themselves "I can do that." And if the slower generations of the
machine, those we saw in the 80s and 90s, have nurtured such a tendency in that
person, then perhaps he or she is right. The statement is backward, of course. "I can
do that." should be "I can let the machine do that to me." The irony of this age of
self importance is that we should consider ourselves lucky that we can ascribe any
agency to ourselves at all when we instead place unheard of importance on the
Self - and, consequently, on the Other. When someone does this, or rather when our
society's machinery chooses to do this to a person, he or she becomes an avatar for
his or her wave and the process comes full circle. No longer do we need to love or
hate something totally abstract, some figment of our collective imagination like The
USA or The BJP or The Liberals. Now we have the avatar, a lightning rod for all our
rage.

Donald Trump is not special. He is merely this era's canonical example of these
fractal and reactionary patterns, reified. He is still a man.



---

Trump carries too many peculiar playing card connotations and the tone of it is too
reflective of other descriptions of a man, as though he has any agency, as though he
were even some sort of Primary Agent, that it is difficult to speak about him, as a
man (rather than an avatar), using that word. Let us refer to him instead as
Donald. Donald was a 4-year-old boy. Donald was a serial killer without a high school
education. Donald was the first diagnosed autistic. Donald was a duck.

Donald has problems.

Donald hurts people. He calls them names. He divides them. He encourages violent
words, violent acts. He condones murder - of the very citizens he was hired to serve.

Donald steals. He takes what is not given, from his employer, the citizens of the
United States.

Donald rapes. He has hurt women. He has touched them without their permission. He has
openly admitted this, without repercussion. Without being taught right from wrong, it
is hard to grow as a human being. In fact, one regresses.

Donald lies. Much of what Donald perceives to be his is borne of lies. These lies
have become so frequent, so meaningless, that they fold in on themselves.

It is tempting for us to see Donald, holding such a powerful office, loudly
influencing so many people (ourselves included), and acting out so violently, so
frequently, as a just target for our fear, anger, and hatred. But if we extract
ourselves from the equation momentarily we can reassess how we see Donald - how we
observe him and how we react.

There is no technique or tool other than Vipassana which can teach a person what
passing thoughts do to the psyche. As far as I'm aware, no other tool even claims to
do so. Anything which would make this claim would inevitably become synonymous with,
or a subset of, Vipassana: inspect the body with the mind, down to the tiniest detail
and try to answer the question What am I? The "revelations" of this painful and
difficult procedure are as banal as posters in Kindergartens or the basic texts of
every religion:

Do Unto Others As You Would Have Them Do Unto You.
Love Thy Neighbour.
Do not take more than is given.

For this reason, one need not meditate Vipassana or know these lessons intimately to
appreciate their inherent truth. When we hurt or kill someone, when we steal, when we
rape, when we lie? We are harming someone else, no doubt. But we harm ourselves first
and foremost. In the depths of self-observation the tiniest lust or the most minute
anger can feel so overwhelmingly unhealthy that it makes one feel like it is causing
total obliteration… destroying the mind, the body, and the soul all at once in a
flood of acid and fire. Yet obliteration is not the end. We must survive this,
knowing that our processes of mind and body are constant and continuous. Deep down,
we feel these repercussions all the time.

So we take a step back. We put ourselves in Donald's shoes. We feel how vile he must
feel inside, how broken, how alone, how unhealthy. When he exits the stage, the world
will think as little of Donald as it did before him. For all the screaming and jokes
penetrating our newspapers and television and internet networks, history will not
have anything of significance to say about this weak and insignificant man because
there was hardly anything to say about him when he was alive. A historical footnote,
he will at best present a case study for these patterns which bred him. These mental
habits of his, however, will not - cannot - evaporate so easily. He will walk through
every day of his short remaining life, suffering himself, rotting inside. Barring a
miracle, the mind of a murdering rapist liar will become a tortured and
self-mutilated mess. He will no doubt die alone and unhappy but it is the path to
death which matters most.



---

We ought to be ashamed of ourselves.

No matter which tide of the parted sea we belong to, we are responsible for the
genesis of an environment supportive of someone like Donald. There are others "like
Donald" and if we do not work to improve this environment, there will continue to
be. We need new adjectives. As long as our behaviour is best described as "nasty" and
"divisive" we can't hope to expect any better from our leaders.

When we mock Donald, we mock the weak. He is a weak man. If we consider him beneath
us then we debase ourselves with our patronizing, comedic criticisms. Such a broken
man should not be a source of entertainment but a source of pity. A source of
compassion. We can learn to use his example to begin taking healing steps, to unwind
our own anger, and to redirect the energy of our accelerating and fractal
consciousness.

Donald deserves your attention only where it serves to teach him. At this stage in
his life it is unlikely he will ever learn how deeply he is hurting himself through
his actions (though we can hope) but he can learn from punishment. He should be
punished for the crimes he has committed - and they are many. He, like every person
on this Earth, deserves the patience of justice. Examine his behaviours. Punish the
behaviours which break the law. Vengeance, anger, hatred, and ill-will do nothing to
serve this cause.

While Donald temporarily holds the office of the President of the United States, pay
attention to the President's behaviours only as they are relevant to you. Start with
zero and work upward. Recognize that it was your attention which put him in this
position of disproportionate power in the first place. If you think that perhaps he
is on the receiving end of too much of your attention, you are probably right. Stop.



---

There are more "like Donald" and there will be more yet to come. Practice patience
and walk away when you need space for yourself. I can tell you from personal
experience that spending half a year offline will show you how very little changes in
this span of time, and how much less our observation and influence matters. The less
you pay attention, the easier it will be for you to know when your attention is
essential. A world experiencing armageddon every day will not recognize the harbinger
of true armageddon before it is too late.

The disappointing Canadian Federal Leaders' Debate (in English) held weeks before the
election held perhaps only one small glimmer of hope for us and our future leaders,
from Elizabeth May:

[L]et me just say up front I think leadership is service. I think the thing that
makes a good Prime Minister is recognizing that we're public servants. We haven't won
some kind of lotto. We don't get to lord it over everybody. We're here as your
employee, and we want to work. And I have a little quibble with our introduction
tonight saying who will get "invited" back. It's not to be invited to go to
Parliament; it's to sign up to work and to be a public servant. I believe in service
leadership.

Those who serve themselves deserve your compassion. It is only those who serve the
public who deserve your attention in a democracy.



---
